Well, you're aware that a lot of Greek Americans are angry about the Seminers for being there, not only that, for allowing themselves to be, so to speak, a point that the Republicans used here.
Well, I give the Republicans credit.
I thought he was very clever.
And, you know, if you can get away with it, do it.
But it's not... It seems to me that if one would normally have been there, irrespective of the ethnicity of the Democratic nominee, that's one thing.
But since you've never been invited there before, and you're invited there only because
No, I'm sorry.
He was invited in previous Republican conventions.
Is it next to... No.
No.
But there's a difference, though.
Mr. Tsongas, the Greek-American community had a dream a few years ago to see a Paul Tsongas president in the White House.
Will this dream be realized?
No.
People go on to different dreams.
People dream now of Michael the Cocker's being in the White House.
If he doesn't make it for the others, he won't come along.
If you think about the Greek community and the values of the Greek community and the kinds of young people that are produced in the Greek community, somebody's going to get there.
It may be Michael, it may not be Michael, but at some point those values mean something in this country, and somebody will come along.
Do you have difficulty to tell me if you plan to get involved in public life again, and in what form?
I have no difficulty because I have no plan.
I will never run again.
It's just not fair.
My wife is just starting her law career here.
My kids are doing very well.
I think I have a role to play in terms of a lot of public issues, but I cannot do it as an elected official.
One, I have no desire.
I cannot run again.
It's not in me.
Once you leave the Senate, it's hard.
What would you run for?
You've been to the Senate.
If I wanted to stay in politics, I would have stayed in the Senate.
But I had decided, as you may know, several years ago to run for re-election, and that would have been it, and then try in 1988 for national office.
But if that did not work, I would not have run again.
So it's simply not fair to families, it's not fair to children to grow up in that kind of situation.
If, when, allow me to use the term when, I like it better, when Mr. Lukakis is a electorate and he makes an offer to you to be a member of the American government, will you accept the offer?
I have said that I would accept the offer if they agreed to move the seat of government to Cape Cod.
That means no.
That means absolutely no.
Did you talk with Mr. Dukaitis prior to his decision of running for the presidency?
Yes.
Did he phone you?
How did you...
No, he asked me to come over, and I and my, one of my, the person who was my administrative assistant, who's now one of my mob partners, who ran my campaigns, we both went over, and we had a long discussion.
I said, you ought to run, because you're better than these people.
You're college.
Yeah.
And I said, I know them all.
They were my friends.
I served with them all, and you're better.
And...
I think at the time he was somewhat surprised by that.
But I think after he'd been running against these people for a while, I think he realized that I was right.
He's very bright.
He's a very intelligent and extremely honest person.
The most honest politician I've ever met.
And I think that means something.
And so I encouraged him to run.
I came in late, but were you content with the debate last night?
Well, I made the point that I used to, you know, do debates, and I'm always struck afterwards by how much people remembered style things.
Like, I remember once I did a debate, my tie wasn't straight.
And everybody talking about the tie wasn't straight.
Television is a style medium.
You really get, having been through the process, you really get the impression that what people are doing is more looking than listening.
And I think in that respect, I've never seen Bush more comfortable and at ease.
I just thought it was a marvelous performance.
I thought if you read the transcript, it might be better.
Without question.
But I think, and I spoke, I listened to all the commentators after this, and I was on the phone late last night with people, and the general agreement was that this was a Bush that no one thought was possible.
But he does keep surprising people.
I know a year ago you were asked who among the Republicans
you thought might make it, and you were picking Dole a year ago.
You know, it's funny.
I pulled the clips yesterday.
I thought Dole would ring, because he's very substantive.
I mean, that's a good example.
But that's a good example of how the guy surprises you, perhaps, I guess.
What he said about stop lying about me just killed his campaign.
It just pressed out and it came through.
It was nasty.
It was two seconds of self-destruction, I think.
I have to ask some different questions, because mine is more featurey as opposed to newsy.
This is a magazine piece I'm doing for Anthony's magazine.
A very quick one.
How important is your Greek-American identity to you?
I mean, your Greek background, your heretic descent, is it important?
It's important not only in terms of your descent, but in terms of the values of the future.
When I look back on the success that I've had, I say, why me?
Why did I do it?
And, you know, I live in Long, Massachusetts.
I'm a small, you know, ethnic group.
I'm not the most charismatic guy that ever came down that time.
Why was I able to do it?"
And what I decided one day was that it was what I learned growing up in hard work and education and valuing certain things that in the long run really mean a lot to you.
So I think it's not only the fact that my father happens to be from Greece, I think
That won't fade.
My children are only half Greek, and their children get deluded.
But the values are what's really important.
And that is what Michael has, and why people are drawn to him.
And that's what really has to be preserved.
I happen to think that at some point, there's going to have to be some
soul-searching on the part of the Greek community, about how you retain Greek loyalty in mixed families, mixed marriages, and the role of the Church.
And it's something where I think there's not been a great deal of sensitivity.
On the part of the Church?
The Church obviously is dominated by people who
think in the Greek context.
And obviously, doctrine and politics will always reflect that.
And I think it puts Greeks who are in a mixed marriage at a disadvantage with their children.
And I know it's a very controversial kind of subject, but I think it's the particularly
people who have mixed marriages, and in my case, for example, have only daughters.
So the issue of what is the role of women in the Greek church as opposed to what is the role of women in the Episcopalian church where my wife grew up.
Eventually, there's an inevitability that a larger percentage, for example, of women looking at the difference in doctrine are going to feel more comfortable going the other way.
And I know that's happened in my family, and it's very bothersome.
But you get to the point where you say, well, as long as they go to church and have some religious background, then that's fine.
But the Greekness is going to get lost along the way.
And so we try to think of ways artificially to create an environment where they will understand their heritage.
So we talked about going to Greece and learning the language.
Did you ever go, by the way?
When I spoke to you in 82, you said, one thing I'm going to do is take the family to Greece.
We did.
When did you do that?
We did in 83.
It was the next year.
Yeah, and we talked about going again.
I've been there a couple of times.
You mean since?
Yeah, but not with them.
But that one trip really did.
more than anything else to really make them.
It was fascinating because, you know, they've never been to Greece.
They don't speak Greek.
They've not, because of my father dying in 1980, they've not really been exposed to it in any real sense.
And as I said, they're obviously much more comfortable in the festival church.
But when they got there, they felt like this was home.
It was a fascinating human behavior laboratory.
They felt like they were rooted to the place.
And it really surprised me.
It made me feel very good that they instinctively knew this place meant something, and that they were part of it somehow.
It's a continuum.
It really is, and they're part of it.
No, go ahead.
I hope I can do this in 20 minutes.
This is going to be tough.
Let's start with your vision of liberalism as expressed in your book six years ago.
I don't know how many times Bush used the word last night, how many times he's used it in the campaign.
It's an attack.
It's a dirty word.
You felt that liberalism did have a future by combining pragmatism with compassion.
How do you feel?
How has the road from here gone over the six years since you published that book?
Do you think that there is a future for liberalism?
A wide question.
You can't get anywhere you want.
It's been eight years since there was a book.
The book is a prop in my TV studio.
Okay, but it was published maybe too, I think.
It was written in the 80s, so it was published in the 81.
Well, I mean, I think liberalism has limited appeal.
And I did then and said that times change.
You have to change with them.
You have to be relevant to the problems other times.
And there are a lot of issues where I don't, you know, for example,
Capital gains taxes, like President used my name in vain in the first event.
You know, I happen to agree.
I happen to think you need a capital gains differential in equity.
And I think if the Democrats had moved to that position, and most Democratic advisors agree with that, then Bush would not have that opportunity to say that kind of thing.
Secondly, I'm for nuclear power.
which is why I'm doing this commercial later on today.
And again, you would have taken that issue away from Bush last night.
And a lot of the economic issues— That's the pragmatic side, I think, of the liberalism issue.
It's not only pragmatic.
I think without it, I think it's hard to win a election.
Well, that's pragmatism.
That is also another element of pragmatism, I think, through that statement you just said.
It's hard to win elections.
I mean, it's a pragmatic statement.
You know, when I, we did a poll towards the end of my, we used to poll out every three months.
I'm a great believer in polls to find out what's going on.
Martha, go sit.
No, no.
Oh, she's fine.
Don't, she'll be with you from, she'll follow you home.
We did a poll, and we asked people—we just threw it in, which we'd never done before—how do you perceive polling this as liberal, moderate, conservative?
It ended up something like 26 percent—these numbers may not add up if you get the general point—26 percent liberal, 25 percent conservative, 45 percent moderate.
Really?
I can't believe you had 25 conservative.
You know, for a lot of people, their view of me was working on economic development.
Was this in Massachusetts, Paul?
In Massachusetts.
And, I mean, statewide.
Because what people saw me doing and where I spent my time was trying to understand economics and how you put together an economy in a city or a state and working with high tech, that kind of thing.
I mean, you were once rated the most liberal senator in the Senate, as I recall.
It was fractionally higher than Ted, I think, but that's quite a perception from you.
On social issues, I'm very liberal.
You know, on issues like gay rights, women's rights, abortion, death penalty, sort of those kinds of things, I'm very liberal.
On environmental issues, I'm very liberal.
On third world issues, again,
Well, Third World is different.
I think it's much more pragmatic than how the world really shapes up.
But I think on economic issues, I'm a conservative.
I think if the economy goes to hell, the country goes to hell.
It's that simple.
And Democrats have never shown any interest in how you generate wealth.
I see you sitting here.
You appear content.
You sound content.
And I remember one of the questions I asked you, and this is prior to your decision to leave the Senate and the reason which prompted that.
You said, I'm going to leave on my own terms.
You have always felt that way, I think.
And the illness was perhaps just the occasion to make that decision and maybe accelerate the decision.
But you don't look to me to be an angry man.
I mean, a lot of us thought this might have been Paul Tsongas' year.
And I think it's kind of a spin-off of what Ted was asking when I came in.
A lot of us thought, you know, this could have been your year to be on the debate last night and to have a date with Destiny next month.
Do you think about this often enough at all, not often enough, but at all, that this could have been the year that you might have made the run for the big one?
I don't think about it until I get the question so often that... You have to have an answer for it.
Well, first of all, as I said earlier, I had decided before my run for re-election and the whole campus thing that I would have stayed one more term.
We didn't like Washington.
We didn't like the weekends away.
We were concerned about the impact on the community.
And at some point, you'd have to have normalcy if these kids were to have any chance.
So my feeling was run for re-election in 1984.
So running in 88 was part of the program, right?
Yeah.
And one day you wake up and they tell you you have cancer and it's never been—it's not a survivable form and becoming president doesn't stop anymore.
You look marvelous.
How are things going?
You know, you're only as good as your last checkup, but I went through the bone marrow transplant two years ago, and it's apparently worked.
Great.
I remember when we spoke—pardon me for keep referring back, because it's a nice point of reference for me—you said then, I've got a few things to do yet in public life.
When you first hung out your shingle in law, you said, I discovered I was a mediocre lawyer.
You've been in private practice now for four years.
How's it going?
Professionally.
Are you satisfied with your progress professionally, what you're doing?
Well, I think I've done very well professionally.
If I was a mediocre lawyer then— And I'm using your words, not mine.
I am less than a mediocre lawyer now, and my partners and I have agreed that I will stay away from the courts and the library.
I've never been to court.
I never intend to go to court.
And in four years I've been to the library, the law library at the firm once, and that was to work for a newspaper.
So what specifically, what kind of law are you doing then?
I'm not really doing law.
I'm really involved in real estate projects like, you know, we've tried to visit Boston Garden.
A lot of energy projects are involved in an attempt to build a pipeline from Alberta to the Northeast.
We represent people like the Humane Society of the United States and the National Venture Capital.
So it's really an issue-based law practice, not a law-based law practice.
And I'm just using one of your quotes from the story.
I want to go out on my terms, not someone else's.
That seems to be not just a political decision.
You seem to be guiding your life along that philosophy.
Well, I don't want to be a Willie May.
There you go.
I remember that last game in the World Series.
Isn't it terrible?
Look at Sandy Koufax went out of the top of his game, and he's been honored ever since.
Ted Williams.
These guys would hang on and hang on and the same thing is true in policy.
Jimmy Brown, Rocky Marciano, sports.
I'm sorry, but I remember I started that piece, one of your daughters came up to you and said, Daddy, do we have to live in the White House?
It was a great quote because you never lost an election I don't think.
And so he was just expected, I mean, from city council to county commissioner to Congress to the Senate.
Next stop, 1600 Pennsylvania.
I imagine the kids are quite happy that you're out of that—the family is pleased that you're out of that life.
Yeah, they are.
Though occasionally the older two will say, they wish you rad if they wanted to work in the campaign.
so i i don't see any any is there any frustration for you though i mean not anger you certainly don't look like an angry man but when you see these issues of the day being tossed back and forth and i know you feel you have the highest respect for tukakis but is there frustration that it's not you out there swinging away and carrying the flag and
No.
You know, I go to Washington.
This week I've been to Washington twice on business.
And when I go, I don't, there's nothing, nothing clicks inside of me that says, I miss it.
I miss it.
And, you know, you can't, no one can have gone through what I've been through or not be affected by it.
I mean, you really, you know, I think other things mean more to you than the glory and the long life.
And I'm involved, as you know, in a number of the Cape Cod stuff and a lot of issues with the law firm.
Plus, I serve on a number of boards that have university boards and things like that.
So, I keep my finger in enough.
Plus, as I said, I'm in Washington on occasion to still keep up my friendships.
was in Austria this summer conducting seminars for Europeans on going back to Denmark next month.
So a lot of that continues.
But in terms of would I run this campaign differently?
Sure.
And we talked about it a lot.
And I'm more of a centrist than most Democrats.
But I think Michael has
qualities that I don't have.
And I think it's carried them a long way.
Well, you've had an award-winning ad, Hey Tickets.
Do you think Mike could have benefited from some kind of an advertising scheme like that?
I don't fault Michael in the same way I don't credit Bush.
His campaigns, to a large extent, are really strategies.
And as we did on the ticket there, which everyone got credit to.
I had nothing to do with it.
It was great to go.
It was the staff.
And Bush had superb advisors, Jim Baker, people like that.
And Michael did not.
I mean, there are good people who are very bright.
But if you've not been around the circuit, you don't have the touch.
I mean, things would happen, and I would—it touches everything, and it's like basketball.
Well, I remember when you were looking ahead to your 84 campaign, it was anticipated that the right and the moral majority and all the others were going to come in, and I think they had announced that you were a target.
And I love the quote, I mean, you're a tough guy.
This is a tough business, and you have to be willing to mix it up with them.
You weren't going to let them push you around, and whatever charges might have been made, you would have answered.
My piece is going to be coming out after the election, so this is kind of a vague thing that you can put on your recorder if you want.
But do you think that Dupacus could have mixed it up a little more?
I thought they did well to the convention, very well.
And I thought the speech at the convention was absolutely superb.
It was wonderful.
But then it almost like it went into neutral.
And Bush's advisors really did a good job.
And what they did was they defined Michael, and you can't let that happen.
You've got to define yourself.
Because if your opponent defines you, it's not going to be pleasant, and it's not going to be complimentary.
And that's what happened.
It's really too bad because I know Michael and I consider myself a friend and have seen him up close and what I admire about him and what I respect about him has not really come through.
It's been like last night.
And I think it's really been bottled up.
And I think the people around them are so issue-oriented, so professorial, so academic, that the feel of the game, the touch of the game, I don't think it was basically respected by that circle.
And so the real person, I don't think, has really been understood.
Are you optimistic?
I mean, my piece is coming out after the election, but are you optimistic or pessimistic?
I mean, we've got three weeks left.
Well, I think that the chance they have is to focus on the economic issue.
I mean, you cannot at this juncture talk about eight or nine different issues.
People don't want to smorgas for it.
You're going to have to give them a central thing.
If I'm lucky, this is what's going to happen on economic issues.
My preference is you do it on the deficit and the issue of foreign ownership, because that's what the deficit means.
And I think if you can make people understand what the Reagan-Bush deficits mean to this country over the long term, I think you can win this stuff.
If you don't do it, I think it's a long shot.
I think you've already answered, do you miss politics?
The answer is no.
It's one word.
You don't miss it, I guess.
Well, I'm involved in it.
I'm still, you know, I'm not totally outside the process, but— You don't foresee getting back—the reason I'm rushing these things is I know you've got time to—you don't foresee ever getting back in.
It's gone.
It's behind you.
Well, you asked the question, why would I run for?
Listen, John Quincy Adams left the presidency and went back to the House.
Humphrey went back to the Senate.
I mean, there are things that you could find some satisfaction in.
If Mike's elected, maybe you'd like to be governor.
Who knows?
No.
You know, a lot of it is, I mean, you've got to really want something.
And if you've given us something like the Senate, I guess my view is that I want to go on to do different things.
And, you know, I've learned a lot in these corporate boards.
And I think I've become a lot more knowledgeable than I used to be about certain things.
You once told me that you had to leave your ethnic roots in order to appreciate them, and I think I covered that in a previous story.
Do you feel similarly, you could say the same thing about politics, to appreciate it more now that you're out of it?
Maybe I'm stretching the comparison a little bit, I don't know.
Well, one thing, I think if I were the senator after this experience I've been through, I would have been a better senator.
I just think I've been shocked into doing the kind of thinking that most people don't do because they don't have to.
And it's somewhat ironic that at a time when I probably would be better, I don't want to do it, and I'm not going to do it.
So in essence, I don't think I appreciate it more
After the fact, I have a sense that, well, I suppose in a way you're right, that I have a greater sense now of appreciation for the responsibility.
And I think the book that I did really means a lot to me, because it tried to break through some of the, you know, do things for political reasons.
not um yeah i wouldn't